Note 4: Sun Jun 27 2021, javajosh

# You must make your own Personal Information Management system.

The truth is there are plenty of challenges. But the most interesting one to me boils down to "personal information management". This means using your device to measure your surroundings, and you, and to help you get value from that data. While this sounds bland, consider how many  industries match this pattern. The only difference is that a 3rd party builds tools you can use to analyze yourself, as long as they get to use the data too.

The greatest predictor of success is whether or not you take pleasure in knowing how something is made, and why it is made that way (and not in some other way). If you do not, then your chances of success are slight.

But if you *do* take pleasure, then you are in for a treat! For the task of personal information management is nothing less than a detailed exploration into how *you* think about things.

Much of my time is spent pondering big questions. And railing against broken systems (when rules are not enforced, or enforced unevenly). One big question is about the nature of programs. What a good data structure is, one that works at several levels of abstraction (for the OS process, for the thread, for the lightweight process (core, in simpatico). But why do I care about such rarified topics? Shouldn't I be working on concrete things? Well, I believe that if I can get this right I can solve a wide swath of problems so well, that developers will flock to my platform (because it immediately becomes their platform).

One of the best things about it. Consider the privileged, and unique perspective these programs can get. That's something no-one else provides.
